- I saw this video on Twitter
with over 5 million views,
and then again on YouTube
with nearly 1 million views.
Basically, this guy
modified his cell phone case
with propellers to take
selfies, which is awesome.
My only issue with it is
that it's not only fake,
but it's a scam, which
I'll explain in a minute.
But as for it being fake,
the first clue is that
these are three-volt,
seven-millimeter microbrush
motors like you see here.
If you attach one to a beam like this
and turn it on at full throttle,
you'll see the most weight
that it can lift is six
quarters, or about 30 grams.
The cell phone in the video
with all the flying gear
attached would weigh
about 300 grams, and since
drones are typically designed
to hover at 70% max thrust,
you would need at least 15 of these motors
to do what he did.
But you know, this just
doesn't look as catchy.
In fact, we recreated
the exact setup he used
in the video and turned
the motors to full throttle
and this is what happened.
Here it is in slow-mo, and as you can see,
there's hardly any difference
than if you don't turn
the propellers on at all.
So I'm gonna show you how this
scam artist somehow manages
to break the laws of
physics four more times
in this three-minute video.
And then because obeying the
laws of physics isn't optional,
we're gonna call up fellow
YouTuber Captain Disillusion
to see if he can help a spot
any signs of special effects.
And then with my buddy Peter Sripol,
I'm gonna show you what it would take
to actually build a
flying selfie phone case,
and then I'll put all the details
on a new site I built using wix.com.
But before I do any of that,
let me first explain why this is a scam
and not just a harmless fake video
for meaningless internet points.
With this many views and an
astounding 80% like ratio,
which means most people probably
didn't realize it was fake,
it's a statistical certainty
that some young, aspiring engineer
actually tried to build this themselves.
Worse than their parents'
phone dropping like a rock
and breaking, this might have been his
or her first experience
at making something.
But how, you might ask,
would they know what components to use?
Well, here in the description,
Amazing maker was kind
enough to put links,
Amazon affiliate links.
You can tell by the URLs.
So he is making money off the crest dreams
of aspiring engineers
without enough experience yet
to know that this is total BS,
and aspiring engineers are my people
and you don't mess with my people.
(gun cocks)
Let's do this.
(gun fires)
The second gratuitous violation
of physics comes in this scene.
Force of gravity always points down,
but helicopter spinning blades
create a force perpendicular
to the blades themselves.
So if you want to hover,
you need to be level
so the forces will cancel
out and you won't move.
If you tilt forward and
then break the thrust force
into its x and y components,
you suddenly have an unbalanced
force that will move you
in that direction.
In essence, that's how
helicopters move forward,
by tipping forward.
In other words, it's physically impossible
to hover in an orientation like this.
The forward thrust
component is unbalanced,
and it would have to
move the phone forward.
The third major issue
is the Arduino-compatible
circuit board he chose.
It's the same board here,
and it's supposed to be
the brains for the drone.
Yet this specific model
of board doesn't come
with any sort of gyroscope
or accelerometer.
Here's why that matters.
If you've ever tried balancing
something on your hand
like this, you and your body were creating
what's referred to as a closed
loop feedback control system.
So if it starts to tip over,
my eyes relay that to my
brain and my hand says,
"Hey, I'm no longer feeling
the weight just up and down.
It's also pushing my hand this way."
And so my brain takes all that information
and responds by telling
my hand to move this way
at a specific speed in
order to compensate.
So to keep this thing balanced,
there's this continuous loop
of quickly gathering information,
and then making real-time adjustments.
And closed feedback loops are
used all over in engineering,
from the simple case of a thermostat
that continuously checks the air and turns
on at a certain temperature,
to dartboards that update
their position 200 times a second
to get a bullseye every time.
(bell dings)
To machines that are abused,
and most certainly for
anything that flies and needs
to stay in the air.
The fact that his board
is missing a gyroscope
and an accelerometer means
there's no way for it to tell
if it's starting to rotate
or to fall in any direction.
It's the equivalent of
trying to balance the board
wearing a blindfold and an oven mitt.
You have no idea what adjustments to make
to keep things balanced.
(cat meows)
Which is the perfect lead-in
to the fourth major physics flaw.
Notice how he attaches these motors
and rigidly fixes them to the
phone with double-stick tape.
This means if you start to tip forward,
you have no way to self-correct
the phone orientation,
and it would just turn into a nose dive.
If you only have two propellers
in this configuration,
they both need to be able
to rotate with respect
to the phone in order
to correct for movements
in all six degrees of freedom.
For example, if it starts to tip forward,
you could rotate them both back like this
to correct for that.
Or if the wind is trying
to spin the phone this way,
they could assume this
configuration to counter that.
To return to our balancing shovel analogy,
by fixing the motors directly to the case,
you lose your ability to
even make corrections.
So not only do you have
no idea where to move,
but your arm is locked out from
making adjustments anyways,
which makes it literally
impossible to balance.
(shovel clangs)
Ow.
And my final physics issue with this video
is one of acoustics.
This guy proposes using
it as a hands-free way
to watch your favorite,
super hip music videos,
conveniently dubbing over the audio here.
(upbeat music)
(singers singing in foreign language)
For reference, this is what
an episode of "The Office"
would sound like on a
phone at full volume.
(actor talking)
(propellers buzzing)
And don't forget, you would actually need
13 more motors than this,
so it would be at least six times louder.
So now we've thoroughly established
a multitude of physical
laws have been broken,
let's find out exactly how he faked it.
And to do that, I've arranged a video call
with the undisputed heavyweight champion
of debunking fake videos
using special effects,
Captain Disillusion.
- Make sure to get it as flush as possible
against your skin to minimize folds
that might make it hard to
chroma key out, like this.
(Mark clears throat)
Nice and tight.
Mmm.
- Captain!
- Oh, hi, Mark.
Mark Rober! You weren't
supposed to call yet.
- It's two o'clock.
I'm actually even five minutes late.
- Really? Well then.
(objects whirring)
How can I help you?
- Did you not even watch the video I sent?
- Ah, yes, of course.
The mobile drone video.
I've analyzed it thoroughly, Mark,
and my conclusion is it's totally real.
- Seriously?
- Yes, everything except
for the mobile drone part, that's fake.
If you look very closely,
you might just be able to make
out the huge, shadowing mask
on the side of the phone,
visible in every shot of it flying.
The creator must have been in a real hurry
because it's so messy.
Here, it cuts off the edge of the phone.
Here, the tip of his finger.
And here, it reveals the thing
it's supposed to be hiding, a rod.
It's narrow and light colored,
and probably attached with
the same mounting tape
he used to tack on all the other gadgets.
That's why he's able to grab
and adjust the phone in this shot.
By the river, the mask
hides not just the stick,
but the whole person holding it.
Look closer.
On this side, the real-time water,
and on this side, a still
frame from an empty version
of the shot.
And if we track the phone's
position and rotation,
we can easily reverse engineer
exactly how the stick puppeteer did,
rotating mostly from the
point where it was held.
- Wow, that was very
impressive, Captain D.
Thank you for taking the time-
- My favorite part
of this whole thing is the audio.
The tiny propellers must have made
so little noise at a distance,
it didn't give a proper drone vibe.
So the hoaxers recorded the
sound of the motors up close,
and reused the same clip in every scene,
complete with their muttering
voices in the background.
(drone whining)
- Awesome.
Well, thanks again for-
- But even more impressive
is the number of posts, messages,
and tweets presumably from people
with functioning eyeballs asking me
if this painfully obvious
edit is real, over and over.
- Okay, Captain, well, take care.
I've gotta go back to my-
- Even you, Mark!
How could you do this to me?
How could you do-
- He's such a joker. (laughs)
So it's fake, and now you know
exactly all the reasons why,
but it's still a really interesting idea.
And I was curious what it
would look like if you actually
built one of these using
less special effects
and more practical engineering.
So naturally, I called
in my buddy, Peter Sripol
whose qualifications include building
his own electric plane from scratch,
and he immediately got to work.
(bright music)
Turns out if you take
two brushless motors,
two electronic motor speed controllers,
a flight controller that
actually has a gyroscope
and an accelerometer integrated,
a 3D-printed frame, and two
servos to articulate the rotors,
a radio transmitter for a remote control,
and a four-cell lipo battery,
and then you put them all together,
it actually works.
(propeller whining)
(machine clattering)
Kind of.
We had to do a bunch of test flights
to calibrate that feedback control loop
we talked about before.
So if we notice the drone
is either undercompensated
or overcompensating when it
starts to fall in a certain way,
we tweak the response sensitivity
in between flights until
we get to the sweet spot.
And I should mention,
remember how the motors
from the fake video could
barely lift only six quarters?
Well, if you properly size
them for the task at hand,
they should be able to lift 150 quarters.
And so once we felt like we
had it in pretty good shape,
we took her out for
the maiden test flight.
(gentle music)
(camera shutter snaps)
In our defense, it was a
little windy out there,
but as you can see, it could
be pretty wobbly at times.
The truth is, a bi-copter
like this totally works.
It just isn't a great design choice.
The reason pretty much all
camera drones are quad-copter
is because they're much more stable due
to a larger footprint
shared between four motors.
And by getting clever
with a throttle speeds,
you can move in all six degrees of freedom
with no moving parts.
So there you go, with solid engineering,
you don't need hidden rods
or masking and rotoscoping,
and Sir Isaac Newton
can once again comfortably
rest in his grave.
So the moral of the story
is just don't cheat and lie and scam.
I actually considered
going a little easier
on Amazing maker, but
then I happened to scan
some of his other videos,
like this knee brace
that charges your phone
and even powers this
flashlight as you walk.
In theory, I'll skip the
details, but in reality,
this system would also
never work as shown,
which is why if you rewind
that and stabilize on his hand
in the pocket you see him click
a hidden flashlight switch.
Thanks for watching.
(bright music)
(children yelling)
(snowballs striking)
(Mark yelps)
More tape!